---
title: Guidelines for backlog refinement sessions
tags: programming
---

braindump:

- "grooming" should be used cautiously
- checklists are useful for humans (Kahneman et al., re: heuristics)
- Venn diagram of stories and bugs
- Answer WHY the work should be done
- Answer HOW should the work be done
- Answer HOW one will know when the work is done (testing, validation, etc)
- WHO is doing WHAT work?
- monorepo/microservice - WHERE is the work being done?
- what are the dependencies?
- who knows stuff, can help get over hurdles?
- build/CI? how is it getting built?
- release considerations? how is it getting out to prod?
- monitoring/alerting? how do you know it's working?
- explicit ask for questions, comments, concerns

[a]: https://www.agilealliance.org/glossary/estimation/

---

- What is backlog refinement?
  - Process of defining pieces of work and estimating when they will be done
  - Requires buy-in from devs, testers, product/stakeholders
  - Doing refinement results in a clearer understanding of work to be done
- Problem: Backlog refinement is essentially predicting the future
  - Refinement should include feedback and consideration for work to be done by each of the people performing the work
  - Thinking about all the moving pieces is hard
  - Humans making estimations are subject to the "availability heuristic" and "what you see is all there is"
  - Humans are bad at anticipating things that are not "front of mind"
- Solution: Checklists help
  - Checklists are a great way to put things in front of your mind
    - They offload the "remembering" part of your mind
  - See Intuition vs. Formulas, Thinking Fast & Slow
    - Atul Gawande’s recent A Checklist Manifesto provides many other examples of the virtues of checklists and simple rules.
- How to implement solution: Making a checklist
  - Think about the questions you frequently have to answer (use that availability heuristic while you have it)
  - Think about the issues you've had while working on past stories
  - Plan for changes and additions to the checklist
  - Write statements that can be answered with a pre-written statement
    - "Are the roles of the people who will accept this story understood?"
    - "Is the reason for doing this work understood?"
- How to work with the solution: Using the checklist
  - Have an open discussion about the story; there will likely be discussion and questions that immediately come up
  - When the discussion has wound down, pull out the checklist
  - Answer every question
  - Discuss as needed
  - Write down decisions
  - Move on
- Example of solution: My checklist
  - What is it?
    - Is the reason for doing this work understood?
    - Is there UX work to do?
      - Yes and
      - No
    - Can the bug be reproduced?
    - Are there unusual constraints around the bug?
      - Time
      - Environment
      - Data
    - Are there test cases?
    - Is there new documentation?
  - Is it done?
    - Are the roles of the people who will accept this story understood?
    - Is the acceptance criteria understood?
    - Is there a viable way to accept the issue? (software, hardware, data, environment constraints)
  - What else needs to be done?
    - Is the work spread across multiple systems?
    - Is there other work that must be completed first?
    - Are there SMEs for this work?
    - Does the environment need changing?
    - Does this work change how data is stored or used? (backwards/forwards compatibility)
  - How is it going to be done?
    - Is the development path understood?
    - Is there refactoring that needs to be done while doing this work?
    - Is there changes to monitoring and alerting?
  - How is it going to be validated?
    - Is the testing path understood?
    - Does this work change data-driven behavior?
  - When will it be usable?
    - Is the issue properly represented in release planning?
    - Does this work require unusual coordination to release to production?
  - Has everyone been heard?
    - Has everyone shared comments, concerns, and questions?
    - Is this issue understandable to all parties?
    - Can this be made more understandable to all parties?
